# How does one choose a stack?

## Other Languages

### PHP

PHP (originally short for "Personal Home Page," but now short for "PHP:
Hypertext Processor"), was developed in 1995 using C by Rasmus Lerdorf for his
own personal homepage. PHP is free software that was purpose-built for web
development, but can also be used for general scripting purposes. PHP is the
most popular server-side language on the web, with ~80% of websites whose
server-side language is known running PHP. PHP can be embedded in HTML in a
manner similar to ERB (e.g., `<body><?php echo '<p>Hello World</p>';
?></body>`).

PHP is usually the "P" in the (very popular) LAMP stack - Linux, Apache, MySQL,
and PHP.

### Java / Scala

Java, a largely object-oriented language, is one of the most popular
programming languages in use. Java was initally developed in 1991 and released
in 1995 by Sun Microsystems (now owned by Oracle). Java's tagline is "Write
Once, Run Anywhere" (WORA), meaning that programs written in Java should run
similarly independent of the hardware and operating system. It does that by
compiling Java code to Java bytecode and running that code on a Java virtual
machine rather than directly on the machine's hardware.

Java's syntax was influenced by C++.

### Scala

Scala (a portmanteau of "scalable" and "language") was developed starting in
2001 and released in 2004 by the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne to
address functional programming criticisms of Java. Like Java, Scala compiles to
Java bytecode and can run on a Java virtual machine. Unlike Java, Scala has a
lot of features to support functional programming.

### C# / .NET

C# was developed in 2000 by Microsoft for use in .NET applications. It was
designed to be an object-oriented programming language. C#'s original working
name was COOL, for "C-like Object Oriented Language." C# is usually considered
to be similar to Java.

### Perl

### Compiled Languages (C, C++)

### Assembly / Machine Code